Lecture 2, Module 4

Instructor: Shawn Tabrizi

<hr>

# Block concepts

In this section, we will learn how Substrate interprets a block and what it expects from it.

---

## What is a Block in Substrate?

<div class="left">

A Block in Substrate is just two simple parts:

- The block header
- The block body

</div>

<div class="right">

    ┌──────────────────┐
    │  Block Header    │
    │                  │
    │__________________|
    │                  │
    │   Block Body     │
    │                  │
    └──────────────────┘

</div>
<div class="small-text">
These parts are generally opaque in the client, which gives them minimal assumptions, and maximal flexibility.
</div>

TODO: update diagram of a block, with just header and body.


Note:

isn't opaque mainly block (not header)


---

## What is the Block Header?

TODO: make diagram - expanded from previous

- State root
- Extrinsic root
- Block number
- Parent hash
- Digests (light clients, author signature etc etc)

Note:

Digests can have different expectation, a block author can basically put
a bit anything, it is not the same as information that is part of the runtime
execution.
Yet it is use *a lot* for consensus runing off state, as was/will be seen for
grandpa or babe.

---

## What is the Block Body?

TODO: make diagram - expanded from previous.

A block body is simply a collection of opaque data called "extrinsics".

---

## What an Extrinsic really is?

> Extrinsics are data that come from outside of the runtime.

<div class="small-text">
Yes, transactions are a type of extrinsic but not all extrinsics are transactions.

These could be:

- Signed extrinsics: transactions signed and submitted by external accounts.
- Unsigned extrinsics: transactions that don't require a signature submitted by special origins.
- Inherents: data that is provided by block authors.

Note:

Why inherents: example of a timestamp or any metadata added *by blockauthor*.
Also could add some allowed process specific to author.

---

- The client sees all extrinsics as opaque (`Vec<u8>`).
- Contrary, the runtime should decode, interpret, and execute the transactions.

TODO: Diagram to show the flow of transaction from client to runtime, and where it gets executed.

Note: when to use signed vs. unsigned extrinsics

---

## Substrate Block Assumptions

- Blocks must implement the [`Block`](https://docs.substrate.io/rustdocs/latest/sp_runtime/traits/trait.Block.html) trait.
- A block must contain a `header` field and and `extrinsics` field.

---

## Workshops and Activities

- [Block Iteration Workshop](./4.2-Workshops_and_Activities/4.2-Block_Concepts_Workshop.md) (1 hour)
