---
title: Digital Signature Basics
description: Hands-on application of digital signature
duration: 1 hour
instructors: ["Gavin Wood"]
teaching-assistants: ["Dan Shields"]
---

# Digital Signatures Basics

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >
. . . . . . . . . .
</widget-text>

## Gavin Wood

### _Founder, Parity Technologies_

<!-- <widget-speaker small name="Gavin Wood" position="Founder, Parity Technologies" image="/assets/img/0-Shared/people/gav.png"></widget-speaker> -->

---

## Signature API

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Signature libraries should generally all expose some basic functions:

- `fn generate_key(r) -> sk;` <br> Gerate a `sk` (secret key) from some input `r`.
- `fn public_key(sk) -> pk;` <br> Return the `pk` (public key) from a `sk`.
- `fn sign(sk, msg) -> signature;` <br> Takes `sk` and a message; returns a digital signature.
- `fn verify(pk, msg, signature) -> bool;` <br> For the inputs `pk`, a message, and a signature; returns whether the signature is valid.

Notes:

The input `r` could be anything, for example the movement pattern of a mouse.

---

<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#8D3AED" -->

# Rust Demo

## Key Generation and Signing

Notes:

See the Jupyter notebook and/or HackMD cheat sheet for this lecture.

1. Generate a secret key
1. Sign a message
1. Verify the signature
1. Attempt to alter the message

---

## Hash Functions

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

There are two lectures dedicated to hash functions. But they are used as part of all signing processes.

For now, we only concern ourselves with using Blake2.

---

## Hashed Messages

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

As mentioned in the introduction, it's often more practical to sign the hash of a message.

Therefore, the sign/verify API may be _used_ like:

<br>

<widget-text center>

- `fn sign(sk, H(msg)) -> signature;`
- `fn verify(pk, H(msg), signature) -> bool;`

</widget-text>

<br>

Where `H` is a hash function (for our purposes, Blake2). This means the verifier will need to run the correct hash function on the message.

</widget-text>

---

<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#8D3AED" -->

# Rust Demo

## Hashing a Message

Notes:

See the Jupyter notebook and/or HackMD cheat sheet for this lecture.

1. Use a longer message
1. Hash it
1. Verify the signature on the hash

---

## Signing Payloads

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Signing payloads are an important part of system design. Users should have credible expectations about how their messages are used.

<br>

For example, when a user authorises a transfer, they almost always mean just one time.

---

## Replay Attacks

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Replay attacks occur when someone intercepts and resends a valid message. The receiver will carry out the instructions since the message contains a valid signature.

<widget-text center>

- Since we assume that channels are insecure, all messages should be considered intercepted.
- The "receiver", for blockchain purposes, is actually an automated system.

---

## Replay Attack Prevention

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Signing payloads should be designed so that they can only be used one time and in one context. Examples:

<widget-text center>

- Monotonically increasing account nonces
- Timestamps (or previous blocks)
- Context identifiers like genesis hash and spec versions

---

# Signature Schemes

---

## ECDSA

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

- Uses Secp256k1 elliptic curve.
- ECDSA (used initially in Bitcoin/Ethereum) was developed to work around the patent on Schnorr signatures.
- ECDSA complicates more advanced cryptographic techniques, like threshold signatures.

---

## Ed25519

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

- Schnorr signature designed to reduce mistakes in implementation and usage in classical applications, like TLS certificates.
- Signing is 20-30x faster than ECDSA signatures.

---

## Sr25519

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Sr25519 addresses several small risk factors that emerged from Ed25519 usage by blockchains.

---

## Use in Substrate

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

- Sr25519 is the default key type in most Substrate-based applications.
- Its public key is 32 bytes and generally used to identify key holders (likewise for ed25519).
- Secp256k1 public keys are _33_ bytes, so their _hash_ is used to represent their holders.

---

## HDKD

Hierarchical Deterministic Key Derivation

<widget-image src="/assets/img/1-Cryptography/HD Deterministic Wallet.png"></widget-image>

---

## Hard vs. Soft

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Key derivation allows one to derive (virtually limitless) child keys from one "parent".

<br>

Derivations can either be "hard" or "soft".

---

## Hard Derivation

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Hard derivation requires the secret key and derives new child secret keys.

<br>

Typical "operational security" usages should favor hard derivation over soft derivation because hard derivations avoid leaking the sibling keys, unless the original secret is compromised.

---

## Hard Derivation in Wallets

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Wallets can derive keys for use in different consensus systems while only needing to back up one secret plus a pattern for child derivation.

<widget-image src="/assets/img/1-Cryptography/Hard Derivation in Wallets.png"></widget-image>

---

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Let's imagine we want to use this key on multiple networks, but we don't want the public keys to be connected to each other.

---

<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#8D3AED" -->

# Rust Demo

## Hard Derivation

Notes:

See the Jupyter notebook and/or HackMD cheat sheet for this lecture.

Mention that these derivations create entirely new secret seeds.

---

## Soft Derivation

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Soft derivation allows one to create derived addresses from only the public key. Contrary to hard derivation, all addresses have related or effectively the same private key.

Notes:

Soft derivations can break some niche advanced protocols, but our sr25519 crate avoids supporting protocols that conflict with soft derivations.

---

## Soft Derivation in Wallets

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Wallets can use soft derivation to link all payments controlled by a single private key, without the need to expose the private key for the address derivation.

<br>

---

<widget-text>

**Use case:** _A business wants to generate a new address for each payment, but should be able to automatically give customers an address without the secret key owner deriving a new child._

Notes:

See: https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-accounts#soft-vs-hard-derivation

---

<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#8D3AED" -->

# Rust Demo

## Soft Derivation

Notes:

See the Jupyter notebook and/or HackMD cheat sheet for this lecture.

Let's go back to Rust to soft derive more children.

<br>

<widget-text center>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

- Note that these generate new addresses, but use the same secret seed.

- We can also use the same paths, but only using the Account ID from `//polkadot`. It generates the same addresses!

Notes:

See the Jupyter notebook for this lecture.

---

# Mnemonics and Seed Creation

---

## Mnemonics

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Many wallets use a dictionary of words and give people phrases, often 12 or 24 words, as these are easier to back up/recover than byte arrays.

<br>

Some people create their own phrases. This is usually stupid.

---

## Dictionaries

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

<widget-columns>
<widget-column>
There are some standard dictionaries to define which words (and character sets) are included in the generation of a phrase. Substrate uses the dictionary from BIP39.
</widget-column>

<widget-column>

| No. | word    |
| --- | ------- |
| 1   | abandon |
| 2   | ability |
| 3   | able    |
| 4   | about   |
| 5   | above   |

<widget-text style="font-size: .8em;">

_The first 5 words of the [BIP39 English dictionary](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039/english.txt)_

</widget-column>
</widget-columns>

---

## Mnemonic to Secret Key

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Of course, the secret key is a point on an elliptic curve, not a phrase.

BIP39 applies 2,048 rounds of the SHA-512 hash function to the mnemonic to derive a 64 byte key.

<br>

Substrate uses the entropy byte array from the mnemonic.

---

## Portability

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px ">

Different key derivation functions affect the ability to use the same mnemonic in multiple wallets.

---

## Next Lesson

<br>

<widget-text center>

- Certificates
- Multi-signature schemes
