## Manual Public Key Encryption

This activity introduces students to the idea of asymetric encryption through a hands on encryption and decryption activity done on paper.
The crypto system is based on graph partitioning, and extracting the private key from the public is equivalent to partitioning a graph such that each partition has a hub node connected to all others.

The activity is cribbed from two CS Unplugged activities:
The same graph crypto activity: https://classic.csunplugged.org/documents/activities/public-key-encryption/unplugged-18-public_key_encryption_0.pdf
The foundational graph activity: https://classic.csunplugged.org/documents/activities/dominating-sets/unpluggedTeachersSupplement2012-draft-v1-dominatingSets.pdf

Each student creates a private key by creating a pre-partitioned graph, and highlighting hub nodes, then adding additional edges connecting the partitions to disguise the partitioning.
Then a single number is encrypted and passed to the partner for decrypting.

## Specific Steps

For now the steps are in the CS unplugged language. If we like this activity, I'll re-write them in non-kid language.

## Security

As mentioned in the activity, the graph partitioning really is secure. That is, one could not extract the private key from the public in polynomial time.
However, the ciper over the keys is not actually secure. We could either analyze its problems as an example. Or, my favorite:

Leave it as an exercise for the students to find the alternate decryption method.