# Tokenomics Workshop

### Module 2, lecture 1

* [Tokenomics](#tokenomics)
* [Case-study: Filecoin Economics Paper](#case-study-filecoin-economics-paper)
* [Case-study: Stablecoins](#case-study-stablecoins)

---

## Tokenomics

---

- The tokenomics of a blockchain project are generally distilled in a document of the same name that describes several things:
  - The distribution of tokens at the inception of the project.
  - The evolution of the token base over time.
  - The mechanics of how the tokens can be used.
- From these, it should be possible to deduce the incentives of the different token holders.

---

### Distribution of tokens at the inception of the project.

- Usually the tokens that are created at inception go to:
  - Early investors.
  - Founders, Team, and Advisors.
  - Public (in a token sale, ICO).
  - Treasury.

---

### Evolution of the token base over time.

- In general we may distinguish between inflationary and deflationary token supply.
  - Inflationary supply means increasing supply over time.
  - Deflationary supply means decreasing supply over time.
- The former is achieved if more new tokens are minted than burned, the latter if the converse is true.

Notes:
- Ask students: Is Bitcoin inflationary or deflationary?

---

- The economics of inflationary/deflationary supply is simple:
  - Token supply is a vertical line. Under inflation is moves to the right over time; under deflation it moves to the left.
  - So, if demand does not change over time, then the price will decrease over time under inflationary supply but increase under deflationary supply.

---

### Mechanics of token usage

- In this part, the tokenomics paper describes what the tokens can actually be used for.
- Usually, this includes:
  - Services provided with the blockchain (e.g., paying fees or deposits).
  - Staking.
  - Governance.
- The utility of a token is a main driver of demand in the long run.

---

### What makes good tokenomics?

- It's all about demand and supply!
- Supply is usually easily measurable/quantifiable based on the emission/burning schedule.
- Demand is a lot trickier. Things to consider are:
  - General use case.
  - Staking.
  - Other yield-generating activities.
  - ...

---

### Now, let's discuss!

- We will hand out tokenomics papers of some existing projects.
- Please read them and discuss in groups what makes them a good/bad project from tokenomics view.
- We will reconvene in 25 minutes and discuss in class.

---

## Case-study: Filecoin Economics Paper

---

## Task

- Open up the [filecoin economics paper](https://pdfhost.io/v/sur42Gajg_filecoin)
- The goal is not to fully read the whole whitepaper but to get a enough of an idea about it to discuss its strengths & weaknesses regarding its design.
- _Skip through the legal and marketing stuff_.

---

## Now it is your turn!

- Form groups of 3-5 and skim through the whitepaper.
- Write down answers to the questions and things you note.
- You have 20 minutes before we kick off a classroom discussion.
- Goal: Discuss strengths & weaknesses of the design.

---

## Focus on economic questions

- What is the purpose of the token?
- What utility does the token provide?
- What is the token supply schedule?
- What is the initial distribution of the token?

---

## Case-study: Stablecoins

---

## Case-study: Stablecoins

- Stablecoins are cryptocurrencies that should remain a peg towards a fiat currency.
- Mostly the peg is 1:1 in USD.
- This allows users to enter & exit other tokens without going through fiat, while enjoying the benefits from having a stable currency.
- There are different mechanisms of how this peg is maintained.

Notes:

- Allocate 15 minutes to reading the article
- 5-10 minutes of discussions.

---

### Task

- Read the following article about stablecoins.
  - https://pdfhost.io/v/fg3ZiWmVt_stablecoin
- Discuss in groups the following topics:
  - Why do we need stablecoins?
  - Which different types of stablecoins do exist?
  - Which are the most prominent examples.

---


### Open Discussion

- What advantages and disadvantages does each type of stablecoin have?
- Can this mechanism work? 

Notes:

- Algorithmic: 
  - Capital efficiency because of no overcollateralization
  - decentralization
  - but no backing
- Fiat-backed:
  - Capital efficiency
  - centralized and trusted
- Crypto-backed
  - decentralized and trustless  
  - capital inefficient (overcollatoralization)

---
