# Scavenger Hunt: Decipher the Cipher

In this activity, you'll need to find form into groups of 5.

The goal of this activity is for groups to create a cipher and provide just enough clues for other groups to figure out what the original plaintext is given a cipher text.

For example:

* Group 1 comes up with a unique cipher: letter characterS [Aa-Zz] map to the reverse of the alphabet, i.e. [Zz-Aa].
* Group 1 keeps this a secret but comes up with a hint: *all words are the same but slightly backwards*.
* Group 1 provides group 2 with a cipher text: `Gsv tlzo lu gsrh zxgrergb rh uli tilfkh gl xivzgv z xrksvi zmw kilerwv xofvh uli zmlgsvi tilfk gl urtfiv lfg dszg gsv lirtrmzo kozrmgvcg rh trevm z xrksvi gvcg.`
* Group 2 receive the hint and the cipher text.
* Group 2's job is to figure out what the original plain text is.

## Instructions

1. All groups can spend 30 minutes to come up with their ciphers.
Come up with more than one in case the group you challenge figures out your cipher faster than you anticipated.

2. Once groups have their ciphers and hints, each group will provide another group with their cipher and clues.

3. If your group has figured out the cipher and solution, please keep it secret so that other groups get a chance to figure it out too.

Get creative with your ciphers and make sure to provide enough clues! 
You may want to write your ciphers as a small program.
Similarly, feel free to write programs to help you figure out the correct cipher.

Need some inspiration? Have a look at [this page](https://www.maths.manchester.ac.uk/cryptography_competition_2012/solutions.php).