---
title: M1:L1 Introduction to Cryptography
description: Cryptography m1/l1
separator: "\r?\n---\r?\n"
verticalSeparator: "\r?\n----\r?\n" 
revealOptions:
  transition: 'concave'
---

# Introduction to Cryptography

<section data-markdown="example.md"></section>

### What does Cryptography solve for blockchains?

What are the problems that cryptography solves in the space?
There are a few core problems that are often faced in many contexts, including blockchain.

---

Cryptographic Primitives Used in Substrate and What They Solve:

1. **Signatures**
    - Solves for Problems:
        - How do you prove that possessions are yours?
        - How do you make sure that one person can do something and others can't
        - How do we know that you are you?
    - asymmetric/public key cryptography
        - mathematic requirements
            - example: elliptic curve

There are lots of types of signatures!

---

2. **Hashes (such as Fingerprints/Digests)**

    - Solves For Problems:
        - How do we ensure we have the same shared history?
        - How do we know we referring to the same referent?
        - How can we ensure that we are assured that what we are looking at comes from the same
          truth?
    - The source of truth comes from the same Merkle root, and this convinces everyone else;
    - Metaphor: Fingerprint
    - Metaphor: A bibliographic reference referring to a book in a library; how can we follow it
      backward to a shared, reliable reference AND verify that is a perfect representation of a
      small part of a huge corpus of data?
        - Example: In this book on this page on this library, but you need to know using only a
          small piece of information

Hashes can be used in lots of ways!

---

A hash is used as a commitment a _single string_. What if we want to commit to something that's
structured, that we want to verify a small part of (a fundamental need in Blockchain cryptography)?


-   Merkle Trees are a hash-based data structure that entails lots of hashing.
-   Merkle Tree is a commitment to a list or set, that can be enormous.
-   A Merkle Trie is a commitment to a database. Tree that does a specific thing, which is looking
    up values from keys.

A blockchain is also a hash-based data structure(!)

Could be for a single piece of data (a hash is a commitment for a single piece)

-   For a Merkle tree, you're only interested in a particular piece of it
-   Instances include: - Merkle Root: Summary of the data that you can compare against. Single hash
    you get from the library. It's a commitment to everything in the library. - Merkle Proof:
    Convinces you that it's the right referent, kind of a lookup path to verify that the data came
    from the database with the Merkle Root - The Merkle root is the thing we're agreeing on and that
    the authority is giving us, but the Merkle PROOF can come from anywhere.

*   "A hash function, otherwise known as a one-way hash function, takes an arbitrary message of
    arbitrary length and creates an output (a hash) of a fixed length. The main characteristics of a
    cryptographic hash function are that given a message, it is easy to compute the hash; given the
    hash, it is difficult to compute the message; and that given a message, it is difficult to find
    a different message that would produce the same hash (this is known as a collision)""

3. **Encryption**

This is something you've all heard about in the context of cryptography. "Encrypted" messages in
Telegram, etc. Secret transfer of a message between someone and someone else. Enigma, etc.

Solves the problem of getting a message from one party to another without it being interceptable by
others.

-   HTTPs uses encryption

We don't use it so much in Substrate; we use it in the network.

4. **Erasure Coding**

That's the last primitive we use, but we'll get into later.
