# Economic Basics

---

# Speaker

- Jonas Gehrlein, Web3 Economist

---

### Learning Objectives

The participants...

- can explain the context and meaning of some of the most fundamental economic concepts,
- can apply them correctly in both a pure economic and blockchain context.

---

### Why is this important

Understanding the fundamental concepts in economics is important for the upcoming sessions as well as the student's future work as incentive architects.

---

### Content

We want to go through the following concepts:

---

- _Utility Function_:
  - Map from consumption bundles to payoffs.
  - Generally concave (explain this).
  - Decreasing marginal utility.
    - Example: Marginal utility increases with a fixed fee for a transaction as the volume of the transaction increases. (e.g., a $50000 transaction with a $5 fee is great value, a 10$ transaction with a $5 fee is very bad value.)

---

- _Cost-Benefit Analyses_

---

- _Opportunity Costs_
  - In choice problems, costs from foregoing alternative options.
  - Example: parachain auction bids.

---

- _Inflation and token creation_
  - Traditional use vs. use in crypto.
  - Inflation vs. Deflation.
    - Explain monetary base inflation, which is a bit different than 'traditional' inflation as used in economics.
  - Discuss: E.g., Bitcoin vs. Polkadot.

---

- _Comparative Advantage_
  - Definition: Ability to produce a particular good or service at a lower opportunity cost than its trading partners.
  - Discuss: Specialization in parachains.

---

- _Rationality & Behavioral Biases_
  - Define rationality and note that it is the underlying assumption for many theories.
  - - _Incentives_
      - It is imperative to build incentives correctly, otherwise users will find a way to exploit the system in any way possible to make money.
  - There are plenty of systemic deviations from rationality which should be kept in mind when designing economic incentives.
  - Examples: Loss Aversion, Endowment Effect, Gambler's Fallacy, Default Effect
  - Groupthink and Groupshift: Pyschological effects (more extreme) when there are more people involved in a decision. Conversely, a single point of decision-making creates a single point of failure.
  - Present Bias

---

- _Competition_
  - Has an intrinsic economic value; creates options and evolution.

---

- **Polkadot Reference** (the idea of these parts is to apply the concepts to Polkadot at a somewhat deeper level and to prepare for the non-lecture part):
  - Incentives: Slashing
  - Tokenomics Model
    - Compare Bitcoin, Ethereum and Polkadot's tokenomics. Is Bitcoin secure if it has no slashing?
    - Which inflation model does Polkadot use and what are the parameters _(Save this for Polkadot)_

---

### Activity: (90-120min)

- Plenary discussion: Do we need slashing?
  - Not all PoS protocols employ slashing. Is this a good idea? What is the point of slashing? What are the arguments against slashing?
  - Youtube Video: Micalis Talks on Algorand
- Group work: Compare different tokenomics models
  - [some more context here, should go beyond inflationary vs deflationary]
- Discussion about the design decisions that are taken industry-wide, about pros and cons. Why did each team choose their economics? How does each protocol leverage economic concepts? What assumptions are they making, etc.
- This may demand small prior reading about the different protocols and how they use.
