---
title: EVM, Solidity, and Vyper
description: Overview and history of the EVM and languages that compile to it.
  Focus on architecting real-world smart contracts.
---

# EVM

Ethereum Virtual Machine

* A VM designed specifically for the constraints and features of Ethereum

---v

## EVM Properties

* Deterministic: execution outcome easy to agree upon
* Spam-resistant: Opcodes and other resources are metered at a very granular level
* Turing-complete (with a caveat)
* Stack-based design
* Ethereum-specific (EVM can query block hash, etc.)

Note:

It is critical that the EVM be 100% deterministic and that each implementation
produce the same outcome. Even the smallest discrepancy between two running
nodes would lead to different block hashes, violating consensus about the
results. (TODO: too much elaboration? I'm sure other course material covers this).

Charging appropriately for each opcode is also critical in order to prevent
abuse. Opcodes which are underpriced can allow spam, allowing attackers to
force the network to do more work than are paid for by fees, or even outright
DoS.

---v

## Turing completeness and the Halting Problem

* EVM: Turing-complete instruction set

* But what about the Halting Problem?
* Obviously cannot allow infinite loops
* Solution: Gasometer, a way to pre-pay for each opcode execution

Note:

The Halting Problem tells us that it's not possible to know that an arbitrary
program will properly stop. To prevent such abuse, we check that there is gas
remaining before every single opcode execution. Since gas is limited, this
ensures that no EVM execution will run forever and that all work performed is
properly paid for.

---v

## Gasometer

* TODO: diagram, show that execution halts for each opcode to check gas balance
* TODO: talk about disadvantages (perf)
* TODO: talk about other resource metering?

---

# History of EVM

ideas:
* Early concepts (IIRC, was attempted to be built on Bitcoin first)
* Shortcomings of Ethereum (storage bloat, ...?)
* DAO & hardfork
* Important updates, Eth 2.0

---v

## Ethereum as first smart contracting platform

ideas: talk about the real-world problems that we can reflect on
* performance
* frontrunning (etc)
* hacks
* problems with aggregating smart contract protocols together

---v

## Idiosyncrasies

- Everything is 256bits
- No floating point arithmetic
- Revert
- Reentrancy
- ABI
- Exponential memory expansion cost

---

# EVM Concepts

---v

## Contract accoutns vs EOAs

An account is designated by a 160-bit account ID. These accounts can be controlled in
one of two ways: An `Externally-owned Account` or a `Contract Account`.

### Externally-owned Account (EOA)

* Traditional user-controlled account
* Can only be controlled via transactions signed with corresponding private keys
* Account ID generated by hashing public key

### Contract Account

* Controlled by code
* Created with immutable contract bytecode
* May only ever do precisely what the code specifies
* Account ID generated deterministically when bytecode is deployed

---v

## Bytecode

Executable code is stored on-chain in the form of bytecode. Only `Contract
Account`s have bytecode, and this bytecode controls what these accounts do when
they are interacted with.

TODO: example bytecode, etc.

---v

## Sandboxed Contract State

`Contract Account`s contain a sandboxed state, which stores everything that the
contract writes to storage. Contracts may not write to storage outside of their
own sandbox, but they can call other contracts whose bytecode *might* write to
their respective storage.

---v

## Calling contracts

TODO: talk about different ways to call (may need more context first)

---

# Programming the EVM

---v

## EVM Assembly

show an example

---v

## High Level Languages

- Solidity
- Vyper

---

# Solidity

* Designed for EVM
* Similar to C++, Java, etc.
* Includes inheritance (including MI)
* Criticized for being difficult to reason about security

---v

## Semantics

FIXME TODO: IDK if this is really necessary.
Up to the instructor.

Stephen: I think some amount of context on semantics is useful before jumping
into coding, but obviously a fullblown intro on the language is not feasible
(esp. if we want to do the same for Vyper).

I suggest covering some of the fundamental aspects:

* Basic types
* storage vs memory
* construction (with context of deployment)
* modifiers (?)

---v

## Dev Environment

TODO: Introduce Remix here. It might make sense to mention some other tools as
well, but not in any detail. I think Remix is the clear choice to use hands-on.

---v

## Flipper Example

Code along and explain as you go

---v

## Deployment and interaction with Flipper

---v

## Adder or Multiplier

write, deploy, interact

---

# Storing or Secrets On-Chain

TODO: format this -- how to do the one-click-per-line thing?

Can we store secrets on-chain? What if we want to password-protect a particular
contract call?

Obviously we can't store any plaintext secrets on-chain, as doing so reveals
them.

---v

## Storing Hashed Secrets On-Chain

What about storing the hash of a password on chain and using this to verify some
user-input?

Accepting a pre-hash also reveals the secret. This reveal may occur in a txn
before it is executed and settled, allowing someone to frontrun it.

---v

## Verifying with commit-reveal

One potential solution is a commit-reveal scheme where we hash our reveal with
some salt, then later reveal it.

```
// stored on-chain:
secret_hash = hash(secret)
```

```
// first txn, this must execute and settle on chain before the final reveal.
// this associates a user with the soon-to-be-revealed secret
commitment = hash(salt, alleged_secret)
```

```
// final reveal, this must not be made public until commitment is recorded
reveal = alleged_secret, salt
verify(alleged_secret == secret)
verify(commitment == hash(salt, alleged_secret))
```

---v

## Alternative: Signature

Another approach is to use public-key cryptography. We can store the public key
of some keypair and then demand a signature from the corresponding private-key.

This can be expanded with multisig schemes and similar.

How does this differ from the commit-reveal scheme?

Note:

Commit-reveal requires that a specific secret be revealed at some point for
verification. A signature scheme provides a lot more flexibility for keeping the
secret(s) secure.

---

# Vyper

TODO Continue analogously to Solidity lesson.
Explain pythonic nature
Explain focus on safety (at least compared to solidity)
Show similar coding examples

---

# Summary
