---
title: Substrate; Show Me The Code
description: A hands-on dive into practical matters of substrate, such as docs, CLI and folder structure.
duration: 60 minutes
---

# Substrate; Show Me The Code 👨‍💻

---

## Substrate; Show Me The Code 👨‍💻

Previous lecture was all abut high level information; now we want to bridge that to real code.

---

## A Word on Previous Versions

* This is a brand new lecture replacing two old ones, with more focus on rust-docs.
* Since this is the first time, I have kept the old versions around for you to look into.

---

## A Word on the Rust Exam

Two main takeaways from the previous cohort:
  - Write more rust-docs, expect them to be read.
  - Extensive use of type-system, to prepare you better for FRAME.

note:

Personally doing my best to make it hard, but reasonable, such that it prepares you best for
in-depth development of Substrate.

---

## Documentation Resources

Core

- paritytech.github.io
  - `substrate` crate
  - WIP: `frame` + `cumulus` crate
- Github
- Substrate/Polkadot StackExchange

High level

  - Being revamped: `substrate.io`*
  - Discord, Telegram, etc.

---

## Substrate From Within

Division of substrate when seen from inside:

1. `sp`
2. `sc`
3. `frame/pallet/runtime`

---

## Substrate Binaries

note:

alternative way is to search for `[[bin]]` in all toml files.

---

## Structure of a Binary

Division of a typical substrate-based project:

1. `node`
2. `runtime` followed by a typical `/src/lib.rs` ("*runtime amalgamator*")
3. more!

note:

node is client side entry point, `runtime amalgamator for the runtime`.

- looking at node-template, it only has the two.
- node has even more
- polkadot has even more.

---

## Substrate CLI

Study in the docs:

- `--dev`
- `--chain`
- `--tmp`, `--base-path`, `purge-chain`.

note:

all commands: https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/sc_cli/commands/index.html
all args to a typical run command https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/sc_cli/commands/struct.RunCmd.html

Bute then each node can decide which subset of these it chooses, and how it implements it.

https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/node_template/cli/enum.Subcommand.html
https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/node_cli/enum.Subcommand.html

- execution strategies
- database type
- logs
- RPC
- pruning
- sync modes

---

## Rust-Docs Tips

In the rust-docs:
* In each binary, look into the main types defined in that runtime.
* Search traits, find implementations.
* `execute_block`
* `impl_runtime_apis` / `decl_runtime_apis` / `runtime_interface`
* Substrate CLI Options.

---

## Cargo Files

- How to compile to wasm? `build.rs`!
- just get your `std` features right please!

note:

https://crates.io/crates/substrate-wasm-builder (seen env variables, pretty useful!)
https://docs.substrate.io/build/build-process/

---

## Chain Specification

TODO

