## Lesson 2: Game Theory (60min)
This session aims to cover game theory concepts that are most relevant in a blockchain context. 

### Why is this important
Game theory is the study of incentives in strategic situations. Understanding a little of game theory is important for the upcoming sessions as well as the participants future work as incentive architects.

### Prerequisites
Economic fundamentals.

### Learning Outcomes
The participants should be able to utilize core game theory concepts as taught in this session to the next sessions.

### Learning Objectives
The participants...
* can solve canonical 2x2 matrix games.
* can solve public good games.

### Content
We plan to cover the following content:
- *Nash Equilibrium*: Most fundamental concept. A state in which no player has an incentive to unilaterally deviate. That is, everyone plays a *best response* to everyone else's behavior. 
- We will discuss Nash equilibrium in a couple of canonical games, among which the first three can easily be discussed in 2x2 matrices:
    - *Coordination Game*: Games in which the players get most if they all make the same choice (i.e., if they coordinate). A coordination game always has multiple equilibria. Examples: Money adoption, standard adoption, etc.
    - **Blockchain Example:** Why does money have value? Money only has value because people agree that it does. Money adoption (and token adoption) relies on this, as well as on *network effects*.
        - Network Effect: If network effects lead to a monopoly (and lack of change), then systems must have other means of evolving and adapting. Public ownership is one possible solution (but an public company controlled by committee).
        - Anti-network effect: If there were only one Blockchain, then people couldn't bet on which Blockchain could do better and make money on that bet. Options allow evolution, so there is sometimes a societal gain from not coalescing on a single solution. Having more options, in and of itself, is a good thing because it allows the isolation of different factors, and creates a market in which people can bet on markets.
    - **Blockchain Example:** To come!!
    - *Prisoner's Dilemma*: A game in which the players fail to achieve the socially desirable outcome but end up in a state that is inferior for both. Examples: 
    - *Chicken Game* (or Hawk-Dove Game): These are anti-coordination games in which players choosing opposite strategies are equilibria.
    - *Zero-Sum Games*: A broader class of games in which the payoffs always add up to zero for any outcome.
- Additional important concepts that we touch upon when discussing above games.
    - *Schelling Point*: An equilibrium in a coordination game that is particularly salient, due to social norms.
    - *Dominant Strategies*: Strategies that are optimal no matter what the other player does. The Nash equilibrium in the prisonners' dilemma is in dominant strategies.
- *Public Good*: A public good is good whose consumption is rivalrous but non-exclusive. 
    - *Public Good Game*: A game in which players can bear costs for the provision of public good. If enough contribute, then it is produced, and can be consumed by everyone. Main problem: free-riding. It is never an equilibrium for everyone to contribute.
    - *Open source software* is another example. There is a marginal gain for contributing to consensus; you know it will be done correctly if you do it, and you have an underlying stake in the system (if your electricity is the same as the mining cost, you still have a stake in the value of bitcoin, so there is value.)
    - *Solution*: punishment for non-cooperation or subsidies.
    - *Tragedy of the Commons* could be discussed here as well.
- **Polkadot Reference**: 
    - Public good parachains (subsidies as a solution).
    - Consensus as public good game (slashes and rewards as solution).

### Activity (90-120min)
In this non-lecture part, we want the participants to solve specific games. 
- Calculate Nash equilibrium in different games.
- Some other problem sets from GT

[Maybe we could also start here with some class-room experiments?]

