## Lesson 4: Collective Decision Making  (60min)

This section provides an overview of the different mechanisms that can be used in a society to make decisions as a unit.


**Why it is important** 
Governance, elections, delegation, etc., are key for the correct functioning of decentralized organizations. In turn, decentralized applications are bringing new innovations and renewed interest to the theory of collective decision making.

**Prerequisites**
- (maybe) read material about types of PoS

**Learning outcomes**
The student will develop basic intuition about NPoS, Polkadot governance, and the reason behind their design choices.

**Learning objectives**
- Learn the most common voting rules
- Learn the most common types of proof-of-stake

**Content**

- What and why?
    - Useful for people to come together and make a collective decision: war, trade, laws, private property, money
    - Example of a village
    - Three main objectives: 
        - Legitimacy: notions of fairness, representation, empowerment of people
        - Usefulness: decisions taken are best for society, fast response when needed, etc. (for blockchain: security)
        - Coordination: participation is simple and cheap, process is resource efficient

- Relevance to blockchain
    - Finalizing blocks
    - Functionality updates

- Types:
    - Toy examples (village example)
        - drawing straws (PoW)
        - round robin
        - tyrant, dynasty
        - everyone votes on everything?
    - Delegative systems
        - Minorities (families) elect representatives and they form a parliament
        - Committee election systems
        - NPoS
    - Direct democracy
        - Referendums
        - Binary decisions
        - Non-binary decisions
    - Splits (going from villages to nations)
        - How are minorities defined? Geographical vs political parties vs guilds vs families
        - What if there is division witin a split?
        - Gerrymandering

- Why are some decision-making systems better than others? 
    - They can be judged on:
        - Legitimacy/Perceived Fairness
        - Usefulness/Efficacy for the Collective
        - Other Possible Evaluation Criteria:
            - "Decision Quality" as judged by different populations
            - Cost of voting? (getting more people to vote by lowering cost? this leads to more voting and more perceived fairness)
            - Feasability (Operational cost, working within constraints)
            - Security as a mechanism to ensure that 'better' (fairer? more effective?) decisions are made
- In winner-take-all decision making processes, the 'winners' can be chosen by:
    - Random
    - Force
    - Delegated Election 
    - Popular Election
- There are both real world and Blockchain examples of each, which we'll discuss in this lesson.

Broad Systems of Decision Making
* Nakomoto Decision Making
* BABE = Nakomoto Decision Making + Delegation, the smaller number of individuals are selected to make a block
* 
* Other blockchain and real world collective decision making systems to come

What is voting at heart?
- It's about taking a bunch of economic actors who want or are forced to act as a collective and work as a single economic actor. Aggregating agents. 
- We need to have a mechanism for decisions to be made? What mechanisms are available? How do we evaluate them? What are the ramifications of implementation constraints (e.g., decreasing the number of votes needed)?
- Voting is one of many mechanisms to come to a collective decision

What voting is for in the context of Blockchain:
* Individual economic actors that make decisions that govern their own lives. With a collective that has shared resources, they need to make a collective decision; what are the advantages and disadvantages of different ways of making a collective decision?

What's the role of delegation?
* Delegation is a means of simplifying the system, and it comes at a huge cost
    * Reduces accuracy, but makes systems manageable.
    * Now we have ways to implement large-scale voting, so delegation has less of a practical role.
    * Random round robin as a power structure vs. elected delegates
    * Agile delegation
        * Delegating to different people based on what decision there is to be made
    * Elections
    * Parallels with existing government systems 
- Voting types: single vote, approval, ranked, weighted voting
- Voting systems: FPTP, STV, committee elections
- Modern alternatives: futarchy, liquid democracy
- **Application to PoS**: relevant types of PoS, NPoS, DPoS, BPoS
    - Fundamental rules: staying agile and avoiding capture
    - How do we evaluate these different systems; 
        - Legitimacy (Does the collective feel that the decisions are fair?)
            - Important in the West
        - Benefits the collective (e.g., benevolent dictator whose decisions benefit the collective)
            - Important in Corporate law 
    - Current challenges for blockchain: runtime efficiency, security, proportional representation, risk of capture
    - Coin voting
    - Transaction fee signaling systems
    - Mine signaling systems
    - Maximizing the number of economically disaligned actors 
    - Secure systems benefits currency price. In an insecure system, people can't trust the system enough to invest...(check this note)
    - AURA is round-robin, so can't be used for the random decision making mechanism; that way, the decision maker would be known in advance. 
    - For NPoS, the decision is 'should this block be considered final'- we elect delegates and they come together and use a protocol (GRANDPA) to decide which decision should be final
    - Static delegation to create a smaller number of decision makers, still an extra mechanism used, like 
        - majority vote
        - GRANDPA authority
        - Selection of NPoS validators (which in part uses Phragmen)
        - Council (which uses Phragmen)
        - Parliaments (FPTP)
    - Different Way of delegating
        - Liquid Democracy (non-static)
        - Multi-level delegation (heirarchically delegated, elect a parliament, they elect a government, they create the European council)
    - Nakomoto is basically a random selection; chooses a random mining node that solves the nonce (make parellels to the earlier idea about choosing a random person to make the decisions)
    - **Attribute of consensus systems is a collective decison-making machine to decide which transactions happen and in which order**
    - Other challenges: strategic voting, transparency vs privacy, low turnout (paradox of voting)

Governance
- Brief history of governance for social systems
- Types of governance: in Bitcoin, Ethereum, Polkadot, DAOs. Off-chain vs. on-chain.
- Decisions made by the system’s axiom to alter those axioms


Application: NPoS & governance on Polkadot.
- Motions & referenda
- Technical committee
- Phragmen algorithm


### Activity (90-120min): ?
Analyze the different types of PoS as well as the different types of governance on blockchain networks, in terms of: runtime efficiency, ease of use, risk of centralization
