### Core Ideas to Convey

- How Polkadot works on a conceptual level
- The relationship between Polkadot, Cumulus, Substrate and other elements 
- Layer 0
- What are parachains?
- Collators vs. Validators
    - In parachain development, you're creating a collator. 
    - Compare and contrast the benefits of being a collator vs. being a validator. 
- The difference between a solo chain and a parachain
    - Main difference is consensus for a parachain is coming from the relay chain
    - Constraints: For a parachain, there are a lot of things you can get from the relay chain. But there are also constraints that make it a different use case; size of the proof and being able to validate a proof without accessing anything from the **(didn't hear)** side (self-contained proof).
    - A parachain is tightly confined and will break if certain 
        - Don't get to play with consensus as much.
- Broad relationship between relay chains and parachains
    - Shared Security (what's needed to be a parachain)
    - How do you ensure your validation is correct without Cumulus?
    - **{Raul should be invited to discuss this, perhaps a 1 hour history lesson and overview of how things actually are done, with examples}** Governance: How does Polkadot think about governance? Polkadot is a substrate blockchain that has these particular modules: 
        - About the governance of Polkadot; forkless upgrades.
        - Voting rights in Polkadot: What does it mean that each chain has governance? What is governance? 
        - Forkless Upgradability; what are the implications of this? Bad governance can get chains into a bad state. 
        - How did Polkadot evolve into what we have today?
            - History of Polkadot (pseudochain that upgraded itself to be a governed chain with new parachain logic)

- What pallets are used in Polkadot?
        - ..