---
title: Advanced Digital Signatures
description: More exotic digital signature methods
duration: 1 hour
instructors: ["Gavin Wood"]
teaching-assistants: ["Dan Shields"]
---

# Digital Signatures: Advanced

---

### Certificates

A certificate is one issuing key signing a message containing another certified key, which grants the certified key some authority or privileges.

We must already trust the issuing key to attest to this grant of authority or privileges though, traditionally provided under "Certificate Authority" or "Web of Trust" schemes.

---

### Certificates

Issuing keys do not necessarily have unilateral certification capabilities, although some do. Two examples:

- Substrate records session key certificates on-chain, so that only one certificate is valid at any given time.
- The certificate transparency protocol for TLS certificates helps protect against compromised Certificate Authorities.

---

### Certificates in Web3

We are building systems that don't have a "Certificate Authority". But we can still use certificates for many applications.

---

### Session Keys

<!--still haven't gotten to substrate, so keeping this high level for now-->

Session keys are a set of keys that generally run in online infrastructure. An account, whose keys are protected, can sign a transaction to certify all the keys in the set.

Session keys are used to sign operational messages, but also in challenge-response type games to prove availability by signing a message.

---

### Proxies

Sometimes we want to allow other accounts to act on our behalf for certain operations.

We can sign messages (in this case, transactions) that include the authorised account and its permissions.

A digital "power of attorney".

---

## Multi-Signatures

---

### Multi-Signatures

We often want signatures that must be signed by multiple parties to become valid.

- Require some threshold of members to agree to a message
- Protect against key loss

---

### Types of Multi-Signature

- Verifier enforced
- Cryptographic threshold
- Cryptographic non-threshold (a.k.a. signature aggregation)

---

### Verifier Enforced Multi-Sigs

We assume that there is some verifier, who can check that some threshold of individual keys have provided valid signatures.

This could be a trusted company or third party. But for our purposes it's a shared state machine.

---

### Verifier Enforced Multi-Sigs

Verifier enforced multi-sigs generally provide a good user experience, as no interaction is required from the participants.

This good experience comes at the cost of using state and paying for many individual transactions, but is generally low.

---

### Code Demo

<!--
	Just an idea, but perhaps a quick peak into the Multisig pallet to see some storage items?
	Maybe too early to get into transactions, but will show that a verifier can store the _hash_
	of a call authorisation and required threshold of signers to authorise.
-->
```rust
pub type Multisigs<T: Config> = StorageDoubleMap<
	_,
	// Hasher used for the first part of the database key
	Twox64Concat,
	// AccountId requiring a threshold multisignature
	T::AccountId,
	// Hasher used for the second part of the database key
	Blake2_128Concat,
	// Hash (32 bytes) of the message to authorise
	[u8; 32],
	// Information about the approvals so far (which accounts have already authorised)
	Multisig<T::BlockNumber, BalanceOf<T>, T::AccountId>,
>;
```

---

### Cryptographic Threshold Multi-Sigs

Cryptographic multi-signatures can be generated entirely outside of the verifier. But they do introduce more work for the participants.

Example: "5 of 7 key holders have signed this message."

---

### Cryptographic Non-Threshold Multi-Sigs

Sometimes we do not need a threshold represented in a public key.

But want a succint way to demonstrate that multiple parties have signed a message.

Example: "5 key holders have signed this message."

---

### Key Generation - Threshold

Threshold MS requires that all signers run a distributed key generation (DKG) protocol that constructs key _shares_.

The secret encodes the threshold behavior, and signing demands some threshold of signature _fragments_.

This DKG protocol breaks other useful things, like hard key derivation.

---

### Key Generation - Non-Threshold

In non-threshold multi-signatures, signatures from individual public keys are aggregated.

Each participant can choose their own key to use for the multi-signature.

---

### Schnorr Multi-Sigs

Schnorr signatures are primarily used for threshold multi-sig.

- Reduce verifier costs in bandwidth & CPU time, so great for certificates.
- Support soft key defivations.

---

### Schnorr Multi-Sigs

However, automation becomes tricky.

We need agreement upon the final signer list and two random nonce contrbutions from each prospective signer, before constructing the signature fragments.

---

### BLS Signatures

BLS signatures are especially useful for aggregated (non-threshold) multi-signatures (but can be used for threshold as well).

Signatures can be aggregated without advanced agreement upon the signer list.

Verifying individual signatures is _slow_, but verifying aggregated ones is very fast.

(Coming to Substrate soon.)

---

### BLS Signatures

Allows multiple signatures generated under multiple public keys for multiple messages to be aggregated into a single signature.

- Uses heavier pairing friendly elliptic curves than ECDSA/Schnorr.
- Very popular for consensus.

---

### BLS Signatures

However...

- DKGs remain tricky (for threshold).
- Soft key derivations are typically insecure for BLS.
- Verifiers are hundreds of times slower than Schnorr, due to using pairings, so they typically only appear in exotic situations, e.g. light clients.

---

### Schnorr and BLS Summary

Schnorr & BLS multi-signatures avoid complicating verifier logic, but both bring user experience costs like DKG protocols, reduced key derivation ability, and verification speed.

---

### Ring Signatures

- Ring signatures prove the signer lies within some "anonymity set" of signing keys, but hide which key actually signed.
- Ring signatures come in many sizes, with many ways of presenting their anonymity sets.
- Anonymous blockchain transactions typically employ ring signatures.

<!--
	Speaker Notes

	- ZCash uses a ring signature based upon Groth16 zkSNARKs which makes the entire chain history be the anonymity set.
	- Monero uses ring signatures with smaller signer sets.
-->
---

### Up Next

- Exotic Primitives
- Hash functions and data structures

---
