---
title: Hash Functions
description: Hash functions in Substrate
duration: 1 hour
instructors: ["Gavin Wood"]
teaching-assistants: ["Dan Shields"]
---

# Hash Functions

---

### Introduction

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

We often want a succinct representation of some data with the expectation that we are referring to the same data.

A "fingerprint".

---

### Hash Function Properties

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

1. Accept unbounded size input
1. Map to a bounded output
1. Be fast to compute
1. Be computable strictly one-way (difficult to find a pre-image for a hash)
1. Resist pre-image attacks (attacker controls one input)
1. Resist collisions (attacker controls both inputs)

---

### Hash Function API

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

A hash function should:

- Accept an unbounded input size (`[u8]` byte array)
- Return a fixed-length output (here, a 32 byte array).

```rust
fn hash(s: &[u8]) -> [u8; 32];
```

---

### Example

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

**Short input (5 bytes):**

```text
hash('hello') =
	0x324dcf027dd4a30a932c441f365a25e86b173defa4b8e58948253471b81b72cf
```

**Large input (1.2 MB):**

```text
hash(polkadot_runtime-v9190.compact.compressed.wasm) =
	0xc4d194054f03dc7155ccb080f1e6d8519d9d6a83e916960de973c93231aca8f4
```

---

### Speed

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Some hash functions are designed to be slow.

These have applications like password hashing, which would slow down brute-force attackers.

For our purposes, we generally want them to be fast.

---

### Speed

<center>
<widget-image style="width: 25em" src="/assets/img/1-Cryptography/hash-speed.png"></widget-image>
</center>

---

### Non-Cryptographic Hash Functions

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Non-cryptographic hash functions provide weaker guarantees in exchange for performance.

They are OK to use when you know that the input is not malicious.

**If in doubt, use a cryptographic hash function.**

---

### One Way

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Given a hash, it should be difficult to find an input value (pre-image) that would produce the given hash.

That is, given `H(x)`, it should be difficult to find `x`.

Notes:

We sometimes add random bytes to pre-images to prevent guesses based on context (e.g., if you are hashing "rock, paper, scissors", then finding a pre-image is trivial without some added randomness.)

---

### Second Pre-Image Attacks

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Given a hash and a pre-image, it should be difficult to find _another_ pre-image that would produce the same hash.

<br>

Given `H(x)`, it should be difficult to find any `x'`
<br>

such that `H(x) == H(x')`.

Notes:

Since most signature schemes perform some internal hashing, this second pre-image would also pass signature verification.

---

### Collision Resistance

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

It should be difficult for someone to find two messages that hash to the same value.

It should be difficult to find an `x` and `y`
<br>
such that `H(x) == H(y)`.

---

### Collision Resistance

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

**Difference from second pre-image attack:**

In a second pre-image attack, the attacker only controls one input.

In a collision, the attacker controls both inputs.

They may attempt to trick someone into signing one message.

Notes:

Attacker has intention to impersonate the signer with the other.

---

### Birthday Paradox

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

_With 23 people, there is a 50% chance that two share a birthday._

<br>

Need to compare each output with every other, not with a single one.

Result: Hash function security is only half of the bit space.

Notes:

e.g., a 256 bit hash output yields 2^128 security

---

### Hash Functions Available in Substrate

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px" center>

Hash functions are available in Substrate<br>
as part of the runtime primitives.

- Blake2 (cryptographic)
- XX
- Keccak (cryptographic)

Notes:

Substrate also implements traits that provide 160, 256, and 512 bit outputs for each hasher.

Exercise: Write your own benchmarking script that compares the performance of these algorithms with various input sizes.

---

### Hash Function Selection

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px" center>

When users have control of the input,<br> use cryptographic hash functions (in Substrate, Blake2).

- Non-cryptographic (TwoX) is faster.
- Safe _only_ when the users cannot select the pre-image.

Notes:

Only safe when the users cannot select the pre-image, e.g. a system-assigned index.

Keccak is available for Ethereum compatibility.

---

<!-- .slide: data-background-color="#8D3AED" -->

# Applications

---

### Database Keys

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Hash functions can be used to generate deterministic and unique lookup keys for databases.

Notes:

Given some fixed property, like an ID and other metadata the user knows beforehand, they can always find the database entry with all of the content they are looking for.

---

### Data Integrity Checks

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Members of a peer-to-peer network may host and share file chunks rather than large files.

<br>

In [Bittorrent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BitTorrent), each file chunk is hash identified so peers can _request and verify_ the chunk is a member of the larger, _content addressed_ file.

Notes:

The hash of the large file can also serve as a signal to the protocol that transmission is complete.

---

### Account Abstractions

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Public keys can be used to authorize actions by signing of instructions.

The properties of hash functions allow other kinds of representations.

---

### Public Key Representation

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Because hashes serve as unique representations of other data, that other data could include public keys. A system can map a plurality of key sizes to a fixed length (e.g. for use as a database key).

For example, the ECDSA public key is 33 bytes:

```text
Public key (hex):  0x02d82cdc83a966aaabf660c4496021918466e61455d2bc403c34bde8148b227d7a
Hash of pub key:   0x8fea32b38ed87b4739378aa48f73ea5d0333b973ee72c5cb7578b143f82cf7e9
                                                                                     ^^
```

---

### Multi-Signatures

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

<widget-image src="/assets/img/1-Cryptography/Multi-Signatures.png"></widget-image>

Notes:

By hashing a concatenation of several public keys, a system can create new IDs that require signature thresholds to authorize activity.

---

### Internal System IDs

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Modules within a system may have their own information stored in other parts of the system.

<br>

Storage they authorize use of by the module's internal logic.

Notes:

The hash of some input (e.g. a byte-string representing the module) can be used to identify a particular module within a system.

---

### Commitment Schemes

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

It is often useful to commit to some information without storing or revealing it:

<br>

- A prediction market would want to reveal predictions only after the confirming/refuting event occurred.
- Users of a system may want to discuss proposals without storing the proposal on the system.

<br>

However, participants should not be able to modify their predictions or proposals.

---

### Commit-Reveal

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

1. Share a hash of data as a commitment ($c$)
1. Reveal the data itself ($d$)

<br>

It is normal to add some randomness to the message to expand the input set size.

$$ hash(message + randomness) => commitment $$

<widget-text style="font-size: smaller;">

Commitment: `0x97c9b8d5019e51b227b7a13cd2c753cae2df9d3b435e4122787aff968e666b0b`

---

### Reveal

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Message with some added randomness:

<widget-text style="font-size: smaller;">

> "I predict Boris Johnson will resign on 7 July 2022. facc8d3303c61ec1808f00ba612c680f"

---

### Data Identifiers

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Sometimes people want to store information in one place and reference it in another. For reference, they need some "fingerprint" or digest.

<br>

As an example, they may vote on executing some privileged instructions within the system.

<br>

The hash of the information can succinctly represent the information and commit its creator to not altering it.

---

### Data Structures (in Brief)

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

This is the focus of the next lecture.

Notes:
For now, just a brief introduction.

---

### Pointer-Based Linked Lists

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Pointer-based linked lists are a foundation of programming.

<br>

But pointers are independent from the data they reference, so the data can be modified while maintaining the list.

<br>

That is, pointer-based linked lists are not tamper evident.

---

### Hash-Based Linked Lists

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Hash-based lists make the reference related to the data they are referencing. The properties of hash functions make them a good choice for this application.

<br>

Any change at any point in the list would create downstream changes to all hashes.

---

### Merkle Trees

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

<widget-image src="/assets/img/1-Cryptography/Merkle Tree.png"></widget-image>

Notes:

Each leaf is the hash of some data object and each node is the hash of its children.

---

### Proofs

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 0 200px">

Merkle trees allow many proofs relevant to the rest of this course, e.g. that some data object is a member of the tree without passing the entire tree.

<br>

**_More info in the next lecture._**
