## Lesson 3 (maybe 5?): Threat Models in Decentralized Systems (Concepts from Security and CS)

This session aims to cover threat models in decentralized systems.

*Note: Let's consider where this lives, and the tradeoffs between having this with economics or adjacent to Blockchain and Consensus.*

### Why is this important
Quantitative means to evaluate the relative security systems of different chains; Bitcoins, Relay Chains, Parachains, Bridge Chains. 

### Prerequisites
* Economic fundamentals.
* Game theory fundamentals.

### Learning Outcomes
...

### Learning Objectives
... 

### Content
- Threat models in decentralised systems (30min)
May or may not belong in this module at all. 

- maybe introduce with privacy ( because it has simple to understand models, that devs get wrong all the time.)
- Specialise to decentralised systems - e.g. Sybil attacks.
- Threat models in consensus
    - Bitcoin's 51% hashpower
    - BFT
    - Byzantine General's Problem
        - People may be adversarial, there may be outside incentives that we don't know that are driving their rationality.
    - Reversion Attack?
    - Censoring Attack?
    - State Transition Attack?
 - Cryptoeconomics
     - very different threat models for Defi and Proof of stake 

Interesting Concept: Unaccountability; An unsolveable problem that is one person sends a message, there is no way to know that the person received it. There is no protocol to know this. There are an awful lot of things that have no solution! Knowing the boundaries of what is possible. 

* Defense Models
    * How do we quantify the security of a system?
    * How many actors? What are the costs/benefits of doing a 51% attack in each protocol? (e.g., why do we say Bitcoin is secure and Feathercoin is not)
    * Edge cases in which huge amounts of money enter the system; how might they be considered?

### Activity: 
- Small group discussions: can you solely base your security on economic concepts? 
- Idea: Compare the security of different protocols; what attacks are they vulnerable to? What are the assumptions? What are the cost/benefits of attack? (e.g., Polkadot relay chain? Polkadot parachain? Bridge Chain? Shared security)