# Lesson 1: Blockhain Overview

## Why is This Topic Important?

Many blockchains are presented based on their use case, e.g. Bitcoin as money or Ethereum as a smart contract platform. Participants will need a more general understanding of blockchains.

This module should set students up for effective deep dives on BABE, GRANDPA, Staking, light clients, and Polkadot/parachain architecture.

## Core Ideas to Convey

- Expectations
  - What problem is being solved?
  - Cryptography provides strong guarantees about _information_ without a trusted party, regarless of the conduit over which the information was transported.
  - But not strong guarantees about _behavior_.
  - We want a system with similarly strong guarantees about behavior.
- Global applications
  - People use these services with no guarantees about the logic or information they are interacting with.
  - Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, etc.
  - Journalism, sources
  - Banks
  - Lawyers, notaries, apostilles, regulators
- Trustless provision of digital services
  - Anyone should have access (permissionless)
  - Credible expectations of privacy and authenticity
  - Credible expectations that a state transition is final
  - Logic should be executed correctly
  - No one party (or coordinated group) should be able to stop the system from advancing or behaving as intended (unstoppable).
  - The system should behave as expected _even if_ the operators of the system are not.
- Organization
  - Somewhat ironically, the ability for _users_ to organize sans trust comes from the assumption that the operators of the system are _unable_ (or unwilling based on incentives) to organize.
- Tiptoed around it: It's a state machine
  - State machines have a global state,
  - And a state transition function (STF)
- Trust
  - What is trust? => In this context, blind faith
- Examples
  - Maybe get the class involved here to talk about how we trust things.
  - Two users on Twitter:
    - Trust that we are seeing information from the same database
    - Trust that if a tweet is from X, then X wrote that tweet
    - Trust that others see our messages as from us
    - Trust that the messages we see are the messages the users wrote
    - Trust that we're interacting with the same algorithm that chooses what to show from the database (highly unlikely)
- Application Architecture
  - Removing trust allows us to unpackage applications. We tend to think of an app as a complete package.
  - But when users have credible guarantees that they are interacting with the same data and logic, many applications can be built on the same system.
- Have we even said blockchain yet?
- No
- Good
- Blockchain dimensions
  - Axis 1: Consensus
    - Liveness
    - Safety
  - Axis 2: State Machine
    - What are the rules
- State Machines
  - Data structure (UTXO set, general trie)
  - STF: How do items in the trie change?
- Anatomy
  - State
  - Blocks
- Blocks
  - Header: Hash pointer, block height, digests
  - Body: Array of packets of information from the outside world with zero or more signatures attached
- Polkadot
  - In Polkadot/Substrate, the STF is actually part of the state itself!
- Consensus
  - Whole next lecture dedicated to this, so we are staying strictly conceptual here.
  - Probably good to ask the class to give their ideas of consensus here.
- Liveness
  - How do we ensure that state transitions happen?
  - Someone needs to propose a batch of transitions (a.k.a. block) and new state.
  - Lots of economic incentives
  - For various reasons, people may have some incentive to propose blocks (to guarantee liveness of their own application, for profit)
- Safety
  - Lots of state machines exist that don't record all states. Why keep the history?
  - How to give a guarantee that once a change is committed it will never be reverted?
- View
  - Two people will never have conflicting information and disagree. One might have MORE information, but the other will never believe that a different scenario is true.
- Security
  - What backs these liveness and safety guarantees?
  - Centralized system: trust
  - Decentralized system: proof of authority (acquired in some way: wasting energy, being elected based on stake in the system)
- Bad actors
  - Users should not be able to abuse the system (deny its guarantees to others).
    - Relies on secure design (key choice, hash choice, pub API, etc.) and economic design (make it expensive to mis-use).
  - Operators should not be able to effect invalid state transitions or prevent them from taking place at all.
    - Also relies on technical design (transactional vs. autonomous) and economic design (make it hurt).
- Polkadot
  - If one state machine is useful, probably people will want more
  - Our trust in the _system_ (not any party) is based on its security. How strongly does it uphold its guarantees.
  - But security can be diluted!
  - Polkadot isolates a lot of these systems to provide an environment with strong, non-diluted guarantees that supports many (unique) state machines.
  - Substrate was created to build them.

## Learning Outcome

By the end of this lesson, learners will be able to design a toy state machine and describe a state transition function.

## Learning Objectives

- Learn the motivations for making a blockchain
- Consider a blockchain's role in an application stack
- Describe a blockchain in terms of consensus and STF
- Describe some guarantees that Polkadot provides

## Prerequisite Knowledge or Skills

- Hash functions
- Digital signatures
- Cryptographic linked lists
- Basic economics

## Activities and Exercises

These activities can be done in the language of the student's choice:

- Write a blockchain that advances. It does not need an interface (e.g. to submit transactions), but it should maintain some state (e.g. a timestamp) and should produce new blocks (they can be empty, but the headers would of course be unique).
- Write a fork choice rule.

## References

- [Alternativen zum Krypto-Mining: Warum Polkadot auf Proof-of-Stake setzt](https://www.heise.de/hintergrund/Alternativen-zum-Krypto-Mining-Warum-Polkadot-auf-Proof-of-Stake-setzt-6199450.html?seite=all) ([English version](https://drive.google.com/file/d/171hN-f3GINL2r3Yv-78XXKfSd6Sg68Nj/view?usp=sharing))
- Consensus Series: Parts [1](https://polkadot.network/polkadot-consensus-part-1-introduction/), [2](https://polkadot.network/polkadot-consensus-part-2-grandpa/), [3](https://polkadot.network/blog/polkadot-consensus-part-3-babe/), and [4](https://polkadot.network/blog/polkadot-consensus-part-4-security/)
- [Consensus in Polkadot (Presentation)](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1pTUFqdkyRa1C5mfzL-isyYGKqaFWdUAZraODO_WkSHs/edit#slide=id.g58f1ea59d2_0_6)
