---
title: Exotic primitives
description: More cutting edge cryptography used in blockchain
duration: 1 hour
instructors: ["Alistair Stewart"]
teaching-assistants: ["?"]
---

# Exotic primitives

## Lecture 4, module 1

---
# Outline

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- VRFs
- Erasure coding
- ZK Proofs

---

## Verfiable Random Functions (VRFs) 

---

### Verfiable Random Functions (VRFs)

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

<widget-center>

- Used to obtain <ins>private randomness</ins>, that is <ins>publicly verifiable</ins>

- A variation on a signature scheme:
    - still have private/public key pairs, input as message
    - in addition to signature, we get an output

---

### VRF Interface 

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

* `sign(sk, input) -> signature`

* `verify(pk, signature) -> output`

* `eval(sk,input) -> output`


---

### VRF Output properties

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- Output is a deterministic function of *key* and *input* 
   - i.e. eval should be deterministic
   
- It should be pseudo-random
- But until the VRF is revealed, only the holder of the secret key knows the output

---

### VRF Usage

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- Choose input after key, then the keyholder cannot influence the output
- The output then is effectively a random number known only to the keyholder
- But they can later reveal it, by publishing the VRF proof

Notes:

The signature which proves that this is the output associated to their input and public key.

---

### Example

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- Playing a card game in a distributed and trustless way
- For player A to draw a card, the players agree on a new random number x
- A's card is determined by 
	`eval(sk_A,x) mod 52`
- To play the card, A publishes the signature

---

### Extensions

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- Threshold VRFs / Common coin
	- generate the same random number if $t$ out of $n$ people participate

- RingVRFs
	- the VRF output could be from any one of a group of public keys.

Notes: 

Common coins were used in consensus before blockchains were a thing. Dfinity based their consensus on this. But this needs a DKG, and it's unclear if a decentralised protocol can do those easily.

---

## Erasure coding

---

### Erasure coding 

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- Turn data into pieces (with some redundancy) so it can be reconstructed even if some pieces are missing.

- A message of $k$ symbols is turned into a coded message of $n$ symbols and can be recovered from any $k$ of these $n$ symbols

---

### Classical use

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- Used for noisy channels
- If a few bits of the coded data are randomly flipped, we can still recover the original data
- Typically $n$ is not much bigger than $k$

---

### Use in decentralised systems

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- We have data we want to keep publicly available
    - but not have everyone store
    - but we don't trust everyone who is storing pieces

- Typically we use $n$ much bigger than $k$

---

## ZK proofs

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

How do we do private operations on a public blockchain and have everyone know that they were done correctly?

Notes: 

(we are working on substrate support for these and will use them for protocols)


---

### What is a ZK Proof?

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- A prover wants to convince a verifier that something is true without revealing why it is true.

- They can be interactive protocols, but mostly we'll be dealing with the non-interactive variety.

---

### What can we show?

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- NP relation: `function(statement, witness) -> bool`

- Prover knows a witness for a statement:
 
   - they want to show that they know it (_a proof of knowledge_)

  - ... without revealing anything about the witness (_ZK_)

---

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

*Example:* Schnorr signatures are ZK Proofs

<br>

- They show that the prover knows the private key (the discrete log of the  public key) without revealing anything about it. 
- The statement is the public key and the witness the private key.


---

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- **Proof of knowledge** - if you can compute correct proofs of a statement, you should be able to compute a witness for it.

- **Zero knowledge** - the proof reveals nothing about the witness that was not revealed by the statement itself.

---

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- NP relation:
`function(statement, witness) -> bool`

- prover wants to show that they know a witness to a particular statement (a proof of knowledge)

- without revealing anything about the witness (ZK)

- with a small proof even if the witness is large (succinctness)


---

### Scaling

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

A small amount of data, a ZK proof, and execution time can be used to show properties of a much larger dataset which the verifier doesn't need to know. 

---

### Scaling via ZK proofs in blockchain

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- Large amount of data - a blockchain 
- Verifier is e.g. an app on a mobile phone

Notes: 

e.g. Mina  do a blockchain with a constant size proof (of correctness of execution and consensus) using recursive SNARKs.

---

### Scaling via ZK proofs in blockchain 2

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- The verifier is a blockchain, with very expensive data and computation costs

- Layer 2s using ZK rollups

Notes: 

Of which Ethereum has many, ZKsync, ZKEVM etc. Polkadot already scales better!

---

### Privacy

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

A user has private data, but we can show publicly that this private data is correctly used.

<br>

Example: private cryptocurrency
- Keep amounts secret
	- but show they are positive!
- Keep who pays who secret

Notes: 

You can do some of keeping amounts secret without ZK-SNARKs, but the positive part is difficult. To do everything well, ZK-SNARKs are needed in e.g. ZCash and its many derivatives e.g. Manta).

---

### Practical considerations

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- Very powerful primitive

- Useful for both scaling and privacy

- One can design many protocols with ZK Proofs that wouldn't otherwise be possible

---

### Downside

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- Slow prover time for genral computaion
- To be fast, need to hand optimise
- Very weird computation model: Non-deterministic arithmetic circuits


---

### Downsides conclusion?

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- So if you want to use this for a component, expect a team of skilled people to work for at least a year on it...
- But if you are watching this 5 years later, people have built tools to make it less painful.

---

## Summary

<br>

<widget-text style="padding: 0 200px 50px 200px" center >

- VRF: Private randomness that is later publicly verifiable
- Erasure Coding: Making data robust against losses with redundancy
- ZK Proofs: Just magic, but expensive magic