# Module 3 Lesson 5: Panel and AMA with Sean, Kian and Joshy moderated by Emre

## Panel
	The panel will be focused on blockchain and consensus fundamentals. 

### Panel questions:
1. Open Ended
    1. What are the societal implications of building these kinds of technologies? What do we need to be careful about here, any externalities/problems with building societal functions with p2p networks? 
    2. There are tradeoffs between centralization and decentralization, such as speed at which decisions are made. Could blockchain (especially with governance) consensus for life critical things could be dangerous? How do we get more people to participate?
    3. Light clients, where are they being used(wallets, etc)? And why are they important for the future of Substrate based chains?(Lets highlight the importance of light clients)
    4. Consensus is actually not just one thing. Can we unpack what algorithms are composed to create the whole of consensus? There is the validator set election mechanism, block finality, gossiping, etc. (Goal of this question is to help students understand that consensus is multiple parts working together.)
2. Kian
    1. You’re a big proponent of the work being done on NPoS, I’d like to take a high level peak into what you think about NPoS vs other validator election algorithms. Talk to me about Phragmen, and what problems are Phragmen algorithms solving and what’s being used in Substrate?
    2. What do you think is the future of consensus algorithms? What’re some current limitations? What’s an ideal that we want to get to? Especially in the realm of validator elections.  
3. Shawn
    1.  I want to talk about Kusama, and the idea of a value bearing network where projects can “test” their game theoretic designs. Why is this important in a blockchains development lifecycle?
4. Joshy
    1. What are some best practices for a blockchain developer to know?


## Review/AMA:
	This section will be a review of modules 1-3. It will be a Kahoot, and an AMA. First we will run the Kahoot, then we will have an AMA about each section.

### Review sections:
1. Cryptography/Hashes/Digital Signatures
2. Economics/Game Theory/Price Discovery/Collective Decision Making
3. Blockchain/Consensus Systems/Bridges and Ordering/Application Stack/Light Clients/Threat Models/Unstoppable Code