---
title: Introduction to Cryptography Activities
description: Cryptography foundations for Web3 engineers
duration: 2.5 hours (including 15 minute coffee break)
instructors: ["TBA"]
teaching-assistants: ["Dan Shields"]
---

# Design a cryptosystem

Format: groups of 5
Time: 45 minutes work, coffee break, 30 mins presentations

Using what you know _conceptually_ about the tools that we learned so far, define a step-wise protocol composed of them to do one of the following:

- {TODO define a few options}
- ...

Write out the steps involved, and add commentary about your process, and document the "gotchas" - things that could go wrong using this specific protocol.
Be sure to write down _all_ your assumptions as you progress.
Please form some questions and ask TAs as yo progress.

Present 3 teams (first come first serve, can't do all 10 teams) describing the protocol and get feedback from the instructors & industry practitioners in the audience.
Don't fret if the feedback is harsh, part of the point is to illustrate how error prone cryptosystem design is!

## EvCxR demo of simple crypto crates

Format: solo
Time: 1 hour

Use some substrate examples, could be based on the [template](../../../../content-templates/jupyter-notebooks/substrate_example.ipynb)

## Use Keybase for class chat (non-technical, optional?)

Format: solo
Time: 1 hour, more after-hours

@NukeManDan can put this together based (loosely) on class materials he has already: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ux93XKxzpl_e0qwYoEoPQhgRhevPpuGI/edit
This could serve as part of the class for group chat and more shared files based on the features that platform offers too.
It is a great platform that gets you using applied crypto hands-on in a very easy way.
https://book.keybase.io/ is a great resource to use here as well.
